[LOGO SOUND]
[LOGO MUSIC PLAYING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hello.
I'm Rees Jones and welcome to
module 4, reality checking.
Reality checking
is in essence a way
of testing your mental state
and your physical environment
to ascertain which
reality you're in,
either waking life
or dreaming life.
By default, most of us presume
we're always awake even
when we're not.
And so by introducing
regular reality checking
into your waking life and in
turn your dreaming life, too,
you can buck this trend
by forcing yourself
to stop and question
am I dreaming, the idea
being that eventually once you
have this ingrained as a habit,
the same question will start
arising in your dreams, too.
And if you've been doing
the reality checks properly,
as in slowly and methodically
and in a way that doesn't jump
to any assumptions,
then the answer
will, of course, be
very much different.
But let's start
at the beginning.
In practice, what does a
reality check look like?
Well, it can take
many different forms.
It can happen silently
and internally
within your own mind, or
it can happen externally
in a more visible, obvious way.
An example of an
internal reality check
would be asking yourself
probing questions.
For example, you might
think where am I. Do.
I recognize this place?
Have I been here before?
Never do this on autopilot or
answer in a knee-jerk fashion.
Ask yourself these
questions and genuinely
search for the real answers.
Don't just rush through
them under the assumption
that you are indeed awake.
In fact, it's helpful to
actually flip that assumption.
Assume you're dreaming, trying
to prove that you're awake,
and now with that reframing
in mind, ask yourself again
where am I. Do I
recognize this place?
Have I been here before?
During this questioning you
might realize that you actually
don't recognize your location
at all, in which case
you've already received a pretty
big clue that you're dreaming.
After all, in waking
life, you'll almost always
know where you are,
and even if you're
unfamiliar with
your surroundings,
you should at the very least
be able to recall the timeline
of how you got there.
So that would be a good
follow up question.
Does the timeline make sense?
Can I remember where
I was before this?
If I can, is it possible that
I got to this new location
in such a short period of time.
Again, if you struggle to
answer these questions,
you can be rest assured
you're dreaming.
That or you've received
a serious brain injury.
From there, lucidity
will ensue, but, again, I
must stress the importance
of taking these reality
checks seriously.
When training yourself
in waking life
to ask these sorts
of questions, you
must behave in a genuinely
curious and inquisitive way.
You must convince
yourself that you really
have no idea whether
or not you're
dreaming, not yet at least,
and that the only way
to confirm or deny is
to run these tests.
Now let's look at
external reality checks.
A popular example of this
is plugging your nose
and trying to
breathe through it.
In waking life, you obviously
won't be able to do this,
but in a dream, you will.
However, to ensure this reality
check yields clear and accurate
results, you'll need
to set the fail state
and pass state distinctly in
your mind before beginning.
So think to yourself.
If I can breathe in through
my plugged nose, I'm dreaming,
and if I can't breathe in
through my plugged nose,
I'm awake.
Then perform the reality
check and observe the results.
What happened?
Could you breathe in
through your plugged nose?
If so, rest assured you
are indeed dreaming,
and you're now free to lucidly
explore the dreamscape.
But how often should you
be performing these reality
checks?
Well, simply put, a good amount.
You can't be lax about this
and just do them here and there
when you feel like it.
Instead, you need to set
up a regime of sorts.
For example, start reality
checking first thing
upon awakening every
morning, no exceptions.
You should also get into the
habit of reality checking
whenever something
unexpected or unusual occurs.
For example, you might see a
friend walking down the street
you haven't seen in years.
That was unexpected.
So reality check.
Again, the point's not only
to give yourself reminders
to regularly reality
check but also
to attach the reality checks
to events that will possibly
recur in dreams.
And rest assured unexpected
or unusual events
happen plenty whilst dreaming.
Another good time
to reality check
is during any
experience that brings
on heightened emotions like
getting really upset or anxious
over something.
The amygdala goes
crazy during dreaming,
and this is the part of the
brain that regulates emotions.
So it makes sense that
heightened emotions are
commonplace whilst dreaming.
It also makes sense then
to pin reality checks
to similarly heightened
emotions in waking life.
Anyway how you choose to
do these reality checks
is totally up to you--
internal, external, perhaps
a mixture of the two.
I'm not a big fan of plugging
my nose out in public,
for example, so I
tend to lean more
towards internal reality
checks when I'm out
and external reality
checks when I'm in.
However, you decide
to do it, just
make sure you're doing
them in all sorts
of different situations
because think if you're
too self-conscious to reality
check when in front of people,
you'll ingrain a
similarly bad habit
whilst dreaming and become
too self-conscious to reality
check in front of
dream characters, too,
which is a problem.
A perfect way around
this awkwardness
then is to adopt my technique.
When around others,
do internal reality
checking rather than
external reality checking.
If done right, it's
just as effective.
So in conclusion, the more you
reality check in waking life,
the more you'll start reality
checking in your dreams, too.
And as long as you've been doing
them slowly and thoughtfully
and with genuine doubt, they'll
start acting as a springboard
into lucid dreaming.
And from there, the
real fun begins.